              MFML AND MFDS
                       MFML and MFDS Team
BITS Pilani                   WILPD - CSIS
                                             BITS Pilani




         *
             ZC416 Mathematical Foundations for
              Machine Learning / Data Science
                  Topic: # 11 Optimization
1 / 34
  D IFFICULT TOPOLOGIES - CLIFFS

         Two examples of high curvature surfaces are cliffs and
         valleys.
         An example of a cliff is shown below:




2 / 34
                                   BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  D IFFICULT TOPOLOGIES - CLIFFS

         Considering the previous figure, we see that the partial
         derivative with respect to x changes drastically as we go
         along the axis of x.
         A modest learning rate will cause minimal reduction in the
         value of the objective function in the gently sloping regions.
         The same modest learning rate in the high-sloping regions
         will cause us to overshoot the optimal value in those
         regions.
         The problem is caused by the nature of curvature - the first
         order gradient does not have any information that will help
         control the size of the update.
         We need to look at second-order derivatives in this case.

3 / 34
                                     BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  D IFFICULT TOPOLOGIES - VALLEYS



         Consider the figure below depicting a valley where there is
         gentle slope along the y -direction and a U-shape in the
         x-direction.
         The gradient descent method will bounce violently along
         the steep sides of the valley while not making much
         progress along the x-axis.




4 / 34
                                    BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  D IFFICULT TOPOLOGIES - VALLEYS




5 / 34
                        BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  A DJUSTING FIRST- ORDER DERIVATIVES FOR
  DESCENT

         We need to find ways of magnifying movement along
         consistent directions of the gradient to avoid bouncing
         around the optimal solution.
         We could use second-order information to modify the
         first-order derivatives by taking curvature into account as
         we modify components of the gradient. Obtaining
         second-order information is computationally expensive.
         A computationally less expensive way to handle the
         problem is to use different learning rates for different
         parameters because parameters with large partial
         derivatives show oscillatory behaviour whereas those with
         small partial derivatives show consistent behaviour.
6 / 34
                                    BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  G RADIENT DESCENT WITH MOMENTUM

         Gradient descent may be slow if the curvature of the
         function is such that the gradient descent steps hop
         between the walls of the valley of contours and approaches
         the optimum slowly.
         If we endow the optimization procedure with memory, we
         can improve convergence.
         We use an additional term in the step-update to remember
         what happened in the previous iteration, so that we can
         dampen oscillations and speed up convergence. This is a
         momentum term - the name momentum comes from a
         comparison to a rolling ball whose direction becomes more
         and more difficult to change as its velocity increases.


7 / 34
                                   BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  M OMENTUM - BASED LEARNING
         Momentum-based methods attack the issues of
         flat-regions, cliffs and valleys by emphasizing medium-term
         to long-term directions of consistent movement.
         An aggregated measure of feedback is used to reinforce
         movement along certain directions and speed up gradient
         descent.
         The concept of momentum can be illustrated by a marble
         rolling down a hill that has a number of ”local” distortions
         like potholes, ditches etc. The momentum of the marble
         causes it to navigate local distortions and emerge out of
         them.
         The normal update procedure for gradient descent can be
         written as w ← w + v where v ← −α ∂∂wJ .

8 / 34
                                     BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
         The momentum-based method remembers the update ∆xi
         at each iteration i and determines the next update as a
         linear combination of the current and previous gradients.
         In terms of equations we have
         xi +1 = xi − γi ((∇f )(xi ))T + vi
         where vi = 0 if i = 0 and
         vi = β∆xi = β(xi − xi −1 ) if i > 0 and β ∈ [0, 1].
         The momentum term is useful where only approximate
         gradient is known as the momentum term averages out the
         noisy estimates of the gradient.
         β is referred to as the momentum parameter or the friction
         parameter.

9 / 34
                                    BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  M OMENTUM - BASED LEARNING

          The figure below how momentum-based learning compares
          to gradient descent, and how momentum allows it to
          navigate potholes.




10 / 34
                                 BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  M OMENTUM - BASED LEARNING


          Momentum-based learning accelerates gradient descent
          since the algorithm moves quicker in the direction of the
          optimal solution.
          The useless sideways oscillations as they get cancelled out
          during the averaging process.
          In the figure on the next slide, it should be clear that
          momentum increases the relative component of the
          gradient in the correct direction.




11 / 34
                                       BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  M OMENTUM - BASED LEARNING




12 / 34
                       BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  A DAG RAD


          Here we keep track of the aggregated squared magnitude
          of the partial derivative with respect to each parameter over
          the course of the algorithm.
          Mathematically the aggregated squared partial derivative is
          stored in Ai for the ith variable and we can write
          Ai ← Ai + ( ∂∂wJi )2 , ∀i.
          The actual update step becomes wi ← wi − √αA ∂∂wJi , ∀i.
                                                                           i

          Sometimes we might need to avoid ill-conditioning; this is
          done by adding a small ϵ = 10−8 to Ai in the expression
          above.



13 / 34
                                     BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  A DAG RAD
          Ai measures only the historical magnitude of the gradient
          rather than the sign.
          If the gradient takes values +100 and -100 alternatively, Ai
          will be pretty large and the update step along the
          parameter in question will be pretty small. On the other
          hand, if the gradient takes a value 0.1 consistently, Ai will
          not be as large as before and the update step will be
          comparatively larger than in the oscillating case.
          The update step along the consistent gradient will be
          emphasized relative to the update step along the oscillatory
          component.
          With the passage of time, however, absolute movements
          along all components will slow down because Ai is
          monotonically increasing with time.
14 / 34
                                      BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  RMSP ROP
          AdaGrad suffers from the problem of not making much
          progress after a while, and the fact that Ai is aggregated
          over the entire history of partial derivatives which may
          make the method stale.
          Instead of simply adding squared gradients to estimate Ai ,
          it uses exponential averaging. Therefore the scaling factor
          Ai does not constantly increase. Ai is updated according to
          Ai ← ρAi + (1 − ρ)( ∂∂wJi )2 where ρ ∈ (0, 1).
          The update step is wi ← wi − √αA ∂∂wJi , ∀i.
                                                  i

          The key idea that differentiates RMSProp from AdaGrad is
          that the importance of ancient gradients decays
          exponentially with time as the gradient from t steps before
          is weighted by ρt .

15 / 34
                                      BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  A DAM

          The Adam method uses similar normalization as AdaGrad
          and RMSProp.
          It also incorporates momentum into the update and
          addresses the initialization bias present in RMSProp.
          Ai is exponentially averaged the same way as in RMSProp,
          i.e Ai ← ρAi + (1 − ρ)( ∂∂wJi )2 where ρ ∈ (0, 1).
          An exponentially smoothed gradient for which the ith
          component is Fi is maintained. Smoothing is performed
          with a decay parameter ρf : Fi ← ρf Fi + (1 − ρf ) ∂∂wJi
          The following update is used at the tth iteration:
          wi ← wi − α√t AFi .
                        i




16 / 34
                                      BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  A DAM
          There are two key differences with the RMSProp algorithm
          - the first difference is the gradient is replaced with the
          exponentially smoothed value in order to incorporate
          momentum.
          The second difference is that the learning rate depends on
          the iteration
                  √ index t, and is defined as follows:
                    1−ρt
          αt = α 1−ρt .
                      f

          Both Fi and Ai are initialized to zero which causes bias in
          early iterations. The two quantities are affected differently
          which accounts for the equation for αt .
          As t → ∞, ρt → 0, ρtf → 0 and αt → α since
          ρ, ρf ∈ (0, 1). The default suggested value for ρf and ρ are
          0.9 and 0.999 respectively.
17 / 34
                                      BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  A DAM
          There are two key differences with the RMSProp algorithm
          - the first difference is the gradient is replaced with the
          exponentially smoothed value in order to incorporate
          momentum.
          The second difference is that the learning rate depends on
          the iteration
                  √ index t, and is defined as follows:
                    1−ρt
          αt = α 1−ρt .
                      f

          Both Fi and Ai are initialized to zero which causes bias in
          early iterations. The two quantities are affected differently
          which accounts for the equation for αt .
          As t → ∞, ρt → 0, ρtf → 0 and αt → α since
          ρ, ρf ∈ (0, 1). The default suggested value for ρf and ρ are
          0.9 and 0.999 respectively.
18 / 34
                                      BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  C ONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION AND L AGRANGE
  MULTIPLIERS

          Consider the following problem: minx f (x ), f : RD → R,
          subject to additional constraints - so we are looking at a
          minimization problem except that the set of all x over which
          minimization is performed is not all of RD .
          The constrained problem becomes minx f (x ) subject to
          gi (x ) ≤ 0 ∀i1, 2, . . . m.
          Since we have a method of finding a solution to the
          unconstrained optimization problem, one way to proceed
          now is to convert the given constrained optimization
          problem into an unconstrained one.
                                         Pi =m
          We construct J (x ) = f (x ) + i =1 1(gi (x )), where
          1(z ) = 0 for z ≤ 0 and 1(z ) = ∞ for z > 0.
19 / 34
                                     BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  C ONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION AND L AGRANGE
  MULTIPLIERS

          The formulation of J (x ) in the previous slide ensures that
          its value is infinity if any one of the constraints gi (x ) is not
          satisfied. This ensures that the optimal solution to the
          unconstrained problem is the same as the constrained
          problem.
          The step-function is also difficult to optimize, and our
          solution is to replace the step-function by a linear function
          using Lagrange multipliers.
          We create the Lagrangian of the given constrained
          optimization problem as follows:
          L(x , λ) = f (x ) + ii =
                             P m                           T
                                 =1 λi gi (x ) = f (x ) + λ g (x ), where
          λi ≥ 0 for all i.
20 / 34
                                        BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  P RIMAL AND DUAL PROBLEMS


          The primal problem is min f (x ) subject to
          gi (x ) ≤ 0, 1 ≤ i ≤ m. Optimization is performed over the
          primal variables x.
          The associated Lagrangian dual problem is maxλ∈Rm D(λ)
          subject to λ ≥ 0 where λ are dual variables.
          D(λ) = minx ∈Rd L(x , λ).
          The following minimax inequality holds over two arguments
          x , y: maxy minx ϕ(x , y ) ≤ minx maxy ϕ(x , y ).




21 / 34
                                      BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  M INIMAX INEQUALITY


          Why is this inequality true?
          Assume that x , y: maxy minx ϕ(x , y ) = ϕ(xA , yA ) and
          minx maxy ϕ(x , y ) = ϕ(xB , yB ).
          Fixing y at yA we see that the inner operation on the left
          hand side of the minimax inequality is a min operation over
          x and returns xA . Thus we have ϕ(xA , yA ) ≤ ϕ(xB , yA ).
          Fixing x at xB we see that the inner operation on the right
          hand side of the minimax inequality is a max operation over
          y and returns yB . Thus we have ϕ(xB , yB ) ≥ ϕ(xB , yA ).
          From the above we conclude that ϕ(xB , yB ) ≥ ϕ(xA , yA ).



22 / 34
                                     BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  M INIMAX INEQUALITY


          The difference between J (x ) and the Lagrangian L(x , λ)
          is that the indicator function is relaxed to a linear function.
          When λ ≥ 0, the Lagrangian L(x , λ) is a lower bound on
          J (x ).
          The maximum of L(x , λ) with respect to λ is J (x ) - if the
          point x satisfies all the constraints gi (x ) ≤ 0, then the
          maximum of the Lagrangian is obtained at λ = 0 and it is
          equal to J (x ). If one or more constraints is violated such
          that gi (x ) > 0, then the associated Lagrangian coefficient
          λi can be taken to be ∞ so as to equal J (x ).



23 / 34
                                       BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  M INIMAX INEQUALITY

          From the previous slide, we have J (x ) = maxλ≥0 L(x , λ).
          Our original constrained optimization problem boiled down
          to minimizing J (x ), in other words we are looking at
          minx ∈Rd maxλ≥0 L(x , λ)
          Using the minimax inequality we see that
          minx ∈Rd maxλ≥0 L(x , λ) ≥ maxλ≥0 minx ∈Rd L(x , λ).
          This is known as weak duality. The inner part of the right
          hand side of the inequality is D(λ), and the inequality
          above is the reason for setting up the associated
          Lagrangian dual problem for the original constrained
          optimization problem.


24 / 34
                                     BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  M ODELING EQUALITY CONSTRAINTS


          Suppose the problem is minx f (x ) subject to gi (x ) ≤ 0 for
          all 1 ≤ i ≤ m and hj (x ) = 0 for 1 ≤ j ≤ n.
          We model the equality constraint hj (x ) = 0 with two
          inequality constraints hj (x ) ≥ 0 and hj (x ) ≤ 0.
          The resulting Lagrange multipliers are then unconstrained.
          The Lagrange multipliers for the original inequality
          constraints are non-negative while those corresponding to
          the equality constraints are unconstrained.




25 / 34
                                      BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  C ONVEX OPTIMIZATION


          We are interested in a class of optimization problems
          where we can guarantee global optimality.
          When f (), the objective function, is a convex function and
          g () and h() are convex functions, we have a convex
          optimization problem.
          In this setting we have strong duality - the optimal solution
          of the primal problem is equal to the optimal solution of the
          dual problem.
          What is a convex function?




26 / 34
                                     BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  C ONVEX FUNCTION

          First we need to know what is a convex set. A set C is a
          convex set if for any x , y ∈ C, θ x + (1 − θ)y ∈ C.
          For any two points lying in the convex set, a line joining
          them lies entirely in the convex set.
          Let a function f : Rd → R be a function whose domain is a
          convex set C.
          The function is a convex function if for any x , y ∈ C,
          f (θ x + (1 − θ)y ) ≤ θ f (x ) + (1 − θ)f (y )
          Another way of looking at a convex function is to use the
          gradient: for any two points x and y, we have
          f (y ) ≥ f (x ) + ∇x f (x )(y − x ).


27 / 34
                                      BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  L INEAR PROGRAMMING

          Let us look at a convex optimization problem where the
          objective function and constraints are all linear.
          Such a convex optimization problem is called a linear
          programming problem.
          We can express a linear programming problem as minx c T x
          subject to Ax ≤ b where A ∈ Rm×d and b ∈ Rm×1 .
          The Lagrangian L(x , λ) is given by
          L(x , λ) = c T x + λT (Ax − b) where λ ∈ Rm is the vector
          of non-negative Lagrangian multipliers.
          We can rewrite the Lagrangian as
          L(x , λ) = (c + AT λ)T x − λT b.


28 / 34
                                    BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  L INEAR PROGRAMMING

          Taking the derivative of the Lagrangian with respect to x
          and setting it to zero we get c + AT λ = 0.
          Since D(λ) = minx ∈Rd L(x , λ), plugging in the above
          equation gives D(λ) = −λT b.
          We would like to maximize D(λ), subject to the constraint
          λ ≥ 0.
          Thus we end up with the following problem:

                                 maxλ∈Rm − λT b
                          subject to c + AT λ = 0
                                                λ≥0


29 / 34
                                     BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  L INEAR PROGRAMMING



          We can solve the original primal linear program or the dual
          one - the optimum in each case is the same.
          The primal linear program is in d variables but the dual is in
          m variables, where m is the number of constraints in the
          original primal program.
          We choose to solve the primal or dual based on which of m
          or d is smaller.




30 / 34
                                      BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  Q UADRATIC PROGRAMMING



          We now consider the case of a quadratic objective function
          subject to affine constraints:

                            1
                    minx ∈Rd x T Qx + c T x subject to
                            2
                                              Ax ≤ b

          Here A ∈ Rm×d , b ∈ Rm , c ∈ Rd




31 / 34
                                    BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  Q UADRATIC PROGRAMMING

          The Lagrangian L(x , λ) is given by
          1 T
          2
            x Qx + c T x + λT (Ax − b ).
          Rearranging the above we have
          L(x , λ) = 21 x T Qx + (c + AT λ)T x − λT b
          Taking the derivative of L(x , λ) and setting it equal to zero
          gives Qx + (c + AT λ) = 0.
          If we take Q to be invertible, we have x = −Q −1 (c + AT λ).
          Plugging this value of x into L(x , λ) gives us
          D(λ) = − 12 (c + AT λ)Q −1 (c + AT λ) − λT b.
          This gives us the dual optimization problem:
          maxλ∈Rm − 12 (c + AT λ)Q −1 (c + AT λ) − λT b subject to
          λ ≥ 0.

32 / 34
                                      BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
  L AGRANGIAN FORMULATION


          In contrast to the original formulation
          D(λ) = minx ∈Rd L(x , λ) is an unconstrained optimization
          problem for a given value of λ.
          We observe that D(λ) = minx ∈Rd L(x , λ) is a point-wise
          minimum of affine functions and hence D(λ) is concave
          even though f () and g () may be nonconvex.
          We have obtained a Lagrangian formulation for a
          constrained optimization problem where the constraints are
          inequalities. What happens when some constraints are
          equalities?



33 / 34
                                    BITS Pilani, Deemed to be University under Section 3 of UGC Act, 1956
                      BITS Pilani




          Thank you

34 / 34
